Satellite Reign is a cyberpunk real-time tactics video game that was released in August 2015 for Windows, macOS, and Linux. The game was developed by Australia's 5 Lives Studios and is a spiritual successor to the Syndicate series, which co-founder and programmer Mike Diskett had worked on. The name derived from one of the weapons featured in Syndicate Wars called "Satellite Rain."

After the release of the Syndicate reboot in 2012, the Syndicate Wars producer and lead programmer, Mike Diskett,[1] expressed his displeasure over the game's lack of similarity to previous entries in the series:

This encouraged him to create the Brisbane-based 5 Lives Studios (which included team members who had worked on other video game series such as Grand Theft Auto, L.A. Noire, and Darksiders[1]) and develop a spiritual successor to the game he made back in 1993:[3][4]

Unlike the reboot, which was a first-person shooter, 5 Lives Studios tried to build upon the real-time tactics gameplay experience found in the original games by introducing a fixed camera system and character classes.[5]

On June 28, 2013, Satellite Reign was announced on crowdfunding website Kickstarter with a £350,000 (US$546,875) goal. On July 29, 2013, the project was successfully funded with £461,333 (US$720,832) raised.[6][7]

The game was released for Windows, macOS, and Linux on August 28, 2015.[8][9] A post-launch update introducing four-player cooperative gameplay was released in July 2016.[10]

The soundtrack was composed by Russell Shaw, who worked on both Syndicate and Syndicate Wars.

Satellite Reign takes place in an unnamed fictional city referred to as "The City". A corporation named Dracogenics rises to prominence after releasing a prototype named Resurrection-Tech that is capable of providing immortality. Dracogenics turns to corporate crime and bribes politicians with immortality in exchange for control and influence. This eventually leads to the privatization of The City's services and full corporate control over The City's police force. Civil unrest arises and is suppressed by Dracogenics, but a rival corporation soon comes to light and launches anti-Dracogenics attacks. The player controls this rival corporation and must overthrow Dracogenics from The City.

Satellite Reign has a score of 75 out of 100 on Metacritic indicating "generally favorable reviews".[11]